---
title: Why Start Up?
layout: post
---

Several weeks ago, a good friend of mine asked me, in essence, why I had chosen the startup /
entrepreneurial life. He was considering purchasing a business and beginning a departure from his 
career path in the energy sector. I realized that I had never given this topic much thought myself.
Why did I choos the startup path? I hvae plenty of friends in the software world who have opted for
the non-startup path. So what sent me down this road?

# The Early Days

I graduated high school in 2002, so my college career and subsequent entrance into the career
workforce came on the heels of the dot-com era. My recollection of this time leads me to a few
not-so-surprising conclusions: the bust was downplayed in my mind while the excitement and potential
upside of working at a startup was vivid and glorious.

I could picture myself slaving away, writing amazing code, enjoying my life amongst the free-flowing
snacks, caffeinated beverages, and Nerf gun battles. I could envision making it big when my company
went public and having no limit to what I could purchase. Having grown up in a small
town in a working class family, this ability fixed prominently in my mind. We were never poor or destitute,
but neither were we beyond scrutinizing every financial decision. I was enamoured with the idea of
being able to simply buy necessities without a second thought, of treating myself without having to
make an equivalent sacrifice somewhere else on the balance sheet. I was hooked.

# The first taste

My first company in the tech industry was a scrappy little low-voltage company, pulling CAT5 largely
for a regional banking chain. Besides the two owners, there were about five of us working, give or
take a few depending on workload. I followed this up with a more stable desk job in tech support at
a small ISP where I quickly moved into networking and systems administration. This company was
between 10 and 20 while I was there.

While not your typical software startups, these two companies had startup DNA: small teams, emergent
processes, and constant change. I loved every minute of it, even when I hated it. The pace was
addicting; I was drinking from the firehose of experiences.

# Software

While at the ISP, I met a person who later whisked me away to the true startup world to work at his
funded software company in Dallas, TX. I met him nearly twelve years ago, and, with some brief
exceptions, we have worked together ever since. He has been a role model, mentor, business partner,
and dear friend during this time. And he was the one who pulled me into the world of software
startups.

I visited his company's new office less than two weeks after starting at IBM. This short stint
left a bad taste in my mouth: the company was lethargic. I felt as if I had done almost nothing, yet
my superiors sang my praise; I was mortified. So when I got the opportunity to take a sick day and
fly out to this new office, I jumped on it.

It was nothing special relative to the glory of the venture-backed, dot-com era offices, but it was
leaps and bounds better than anywhere I had worked before, including my current cube at IBM INSIDE
the data center, perpetually hovering around 14Â°C. They had wall sconces providing dim and warm
lighting, nice furniture, dual monitors for every developer, an espresso machine, TV complete with
gaming consoles, and a conference room covered with whiteboards. This, I thought, was it.

I flew home the same day, with my offer already signed. I gave my notice to IBM the next day, ending
my employment there just shy of one month after beginning it. They offered me a salary 40% higher to
stay, but I could not be bothered to hear it: I was fully entranced by joining a startup, by
building something with a team of 6 others that would make us all rich.

# Pivots

Reality struck a blow to me about 12 months later as we were staring at the end of our financial
runway with the knowledge that we couldn't possibly make up the difference in time. We had a complex
product that required much customization with every sale. We had to pivot or perish. 

And pivot we did. Several times, in fact, over the next year. We pivoted and shed: sometimes people,
sometimes equipment, and, eventually, the entire product we had built. We started an internal
Skunkworks initiative, formed a joint-venture with another company, and focused our development. The
final pivot was to consulting, by this time down to three team members with no office. And this
brought me to my second software "startup". It was, technically, a re-startup: the company had a
product and business, but the former CEO had driven the balance sheet to near-negative through his
greed. We came in after much of the staff was laid off with two goals: stabilize and support the current 
product and rebuild it to be better, stronger, and faster.

We helped turn the company around and stuck around for awhile, all the time building on our previous
Skunkworks codebase, which was core to the rewrite of the new product. Eventually, we reached a
point where it was time to part ways from consulting to pursue our own fortunes, independently. And
so, we pivoted again. It was 2012, and I became, at 28, a co-founder.

# Risky Business

I had never been exposed to what I would call real risk in my startup career. Over all of my
experience, beginning with pulling CAT5, the worst off it got was an almost abrupt end to our
contract with the last startup around Thanksgiving. This resulted in a month of limbo as things
shook out, but we avoided that end, though the cost was paid by another of my friends and
colleagues. Two of us remained.

Save that extreme, the worst I had seen was the inevitable "we will be out of money at X point in
the future". I saw this as a challenge. I saw it as a call to action to kick it into high gear and
crank shit out. What I didn't realize was that I was already in high gear all of the time. I did not
realize what I was doing to my body and mind. Or my relationships. I was a 20-something male
introvert, so my emotional intelligence was less than ideal, to put it mildly. I was not in tune
with myself or those whom I loved. I was constantly on, ever in the zone. Thankfully, I never abused
a drug stronger than caffeine, but abuse it I did. At some point, I would religiously take a week or
so off of the stuff to allow my tolerance to reset.

But when I thought of startup risk, I only thought of financial risk. And I had never been in a
situation where I felt at risk, financially, beyond the prospect of a company folding in the near
future. I was not a victim of the dot-com era trope of working for a lower-than-market salary now
for more shares in the company; I knew, roughly, that my salary throughout the years tracked with my
friends who were in more stable software gigs.

Until I became a co-founder. At first, it was all dopamine. We were taking our baby, the result of
many years of labor, and bringing it out to the world. We had some funding at first, and we worked
furiously to prepare everything for launch at Java One. I sacrificed my first summer in Colorado,
slaving away on this labor of love 60+ hours a week. My road bike went unridden; my backpacking gear
unused.

We prepared demos, paid for a premium booth, and my business partner even gave a talk. We brought 
on a marketing expert and another developer during this mad rush to ship, and we were so very 
certain that our efforts would be met by shock, awe, and investor dollars. Java One came and 
then: crickets.

# Downward

It is hard to describe the sense of failure you feel when you've accomplished something difficult,
something challenging, only to have it shrugged off by others. Our booth was quite popular, and many
people loved the idea and were impressed by it. But no one put their money where their mouth was. We
were once again faced with a plane which wasn't taking off and a looming field at the end of our
nicely paved runway...

We worked hard as we approached that end to land in a consulting niche. When the market would not
bear our product, we decided it would be best to leverage its power to consult. But this, too,
proved challenging. And so we shed again, pushed the end a bit further away. We were two again, and
we worked tirelessly. We explored options and adjacencies, anything to jumpstart us. We were still
confident in the technical approach.

A glimmer of hope appeared in the form of an incubator. This was a new incubator, and we were
accepted easily. The problem? The incubator did not begin (and, hence, pay) until five months after
we would run out of money. This became the first time I had to make the real sacrifice. We each had
some consulting gigs lined up that *should* cover us through the interim. Mine fell apart, and I had
no backlog due to the haste with which this all came together. I made the sacrifice, and, looking
back, I was clearly in denial about the situation. 

My income for that year was cut in half. I met deductibles for two insurance plans, as well. It was, 
far and away, the worst fiscal year of my life. Credit cards floated me across the income gaps, and
I made it into the incubator only to have my eyes opened to the reality: no one wanted what we were
selling. I learned a lot which I should have learned sooner: market research, the concept of MVP,
idea vetting. But it was too little to late for this idea. I carry those mistakes with me to this
day, and I will pay for some of them for years to come.

# The Future

I took something of a break by joining a startup which had just closed a Series A round. They had
money in the bank and customers paying for and using their software. It was still a startup, but the
team was over 30 strong, twice as large as my largest startup previously. The failures of the
previous venture had stressed my body, checkbook, and relationships to the point of breaking. Along
with the worst fiscal year in my life, it was also the beginning of the worst period of my life
all-around.

I stayed with this company for a mere six months before rejoining my friend at another startup,
borne out of an older company. I was to be well-compensated, and I had ownership in the company. It
was, once again, a minimal financial risk. However, I did travel 75% (or more) of the time due to
not wanting to relocate to Austin, TX. I worked as voraciously as I ever had, relishing in the
thrill of building another ground-up solution. This time, however, the product was vetted. We were
soon in beta with customers lining up for our GA release.

This company was purchased this past summer, and I continue to work with the same team as well as a
whole new team in the new company, which clocks in at around 100 employees. We have momentum, but we
also operate as a startup, as software is new to the company's DNA. 

Before we were purchased, we all had a glimpse of the end of that runway again. This time, however, 
I was preparing myself by networking more and even lining up some interviews. The mistakes that hit
hardest stick with us the most. The excitement and challenge of the startup world is not for
everyone, but I cannot see myself being happy another way. I plan to continue down this path for the
foreseeable future, learning from my mistakes and the mistakes of others to make better, smarter 
decisions next time around. After all, is that not all any of us can do?
